# DRAFT: What is the shape of the universe?

To answer this in mathematical terms, we really need to probe two things:
- Geometry, or the shape of things as measured locally
  - Do parallel lines stay parallel?
  - Do triangles add up to 180°?
  - Does a circle’s circumference equal 2𝜋𝑟 or something different?
- Topology, or the overall connectedness and global structure
  - Is the space shaped like a sphere, a donut, or something with holes?
  - Does moving in a straight line long enough bring you back to where you started?
  - Can the shape be stretched or bent into another shape without ripping or gluing?

It's possible for things to have very similar geometry but radically different topology, and vice versa.
- Plane vs a sphere (similar geometry, different topology)
- Donut vs coffee mug (similar topology, different geometry)



Homogeneous + isotropic = no built-in special point or direction
- Homogenous = same everywhere
- Isotropic = same in every direction

Due to the following two things, we know that the universe is both homogenous and isotropic.
- The distribution of galaxies, on very large scales, looks statistically the same in every direction and in every location (after averaging over big-enough regions).
- The cosmic microwave background (CMB)—the afterglow of the Big Bang—looks almost the same temperature in all directions, with only tiny fluctuations.

We also know that the universe has 3 spatial dimensions.\
There is a fourth dimension for time, but only the spatial dimensions impact our original question about the shape of our universe.

So, we now understand that when we talk about the shape of something, we're really talking about geometry and topology.

We also know that our universe has the following spatial properties: homogenous, isotropic, 3-dimensional

This means that we can narrow down our search to only shapes that satisfy the aforementioned properties.