---
title: Just Gimme the Default Value
description: Thoughts on API design and default values.
---

When designing an API, configuration schema or language, or similar, it's often very nice for the consumer if fields support an explicit `default` value. Alternative options being `DEFAULT` or `use_default`.

Here's why...

Let's say that I'm setting up my `vitest` config.

```ts
// `vitest.config.ts`
export default defineConfig({
  test: {
    projects: [
      {
        test: {
          name: "unit",
          environment: "node",
          include: ["**/*.unit.test.ts"],
        },
      },
      {
        test: {
          name: "integration",
          environment: "node",
          include: ["**/*.integration.test.ts"],
          setupFiles: ["./tests/setup/database.ts"],
        },
      },
      {
        test: {
          name: "e2e",
          environment: "jsdom",
          include: ["**/*.route.e2e.test.ts"],
          setupFiles: ["./tests/setup/database.ts"],
        },
      },
    ],
  },
})
```

Great. Looking good so far. But wait! I just learned about the [`isolate`](https://vitest.dev/config/isolate) property...

> Run tests in an isolated environment. This option has no effect on vmThreads and vmForks pools. Disabling this option might improve performance if your code doesn't rely on side effects (which is usually true for projects with node environment).
>
> - Type: `boolean`
> - Default: `true`

Okay, cool. Even though the default is true, let's explicitly declare this for our e2e tests because we definitely want to maintain strong isolation in this context.

```ts
[
  {
    test: {
      name: "unit",
      ...
    },
  },
  {
    test: {
      name: "integration",
      ...
    },
  },
  {
    test: {
      name: "e2e",
      isolate: true,
      ...
    },
  },
]
```

Awesome. This gives teammates a clearer hint to not disable isolation for e2e tests, and it protects against the default potentially changing to false in the future.

For our unit and integration tests, we omit `isolate` and continue falling back to the default. We could possibly set to `false` right now, but the default is working fine and there's really no need yet. When it comes to dev tooling and libraries, I'm a big fan of declaring as little config as possible and sticking to the default rails.

Unfortunately, in this setup, we've now introduced a very subtle communication / documentation problem. Do you see it?

The config above now implicitly says that the default value of `isolate` is `false`, when in fact it's actually `true`! This is certainly confusing.

Hmm. Okay. Let's explore alternative solutions.

_Explicitly set `isolate: true` for unit and integration tests_  
Not ideal. Now we're giving a stronger hint to maintainers that we are married to this decision moving forward, when in fact we are not.

_Set `isolate: undefined` for unit and integration tests`_
Better, but kinda awkward.

What we really want is a way to semantically declare for a given property that we just want to use whatever the default value is. Something like this...

```ts
[
  {
    test: {
      name: "unit",
      isolate: "default",
      ...
    },
  },
  {
    test: {
      name: "integration",
      isolate: "default",
      ...
    },
  },
  {
    test: {
      name: "e2e",
      isolate: true,
      ...
    },
  },
]
```

Advantages:

- For e2e tests...
  - give an explicit hint to teammates that we want to maintain environment isolation;
  - protect against the default value potentially changing in the future.
- Avoid a confusing situation where you're implicitly communicating that the default value is something that it's not.
- For scenarios where you need to disambiguate your intent and explicitly say "Just gimme the default", you can do this.

Most people will never analyze their code, and the story it is telling, to this extent. And that's probably fine. But sometimes, when the story really matters, having more expressive and declarative APIs can go a long way.
